Dave.
That's Debbie.
Short run, I really don't see a lot of room for optimism.
I mean, as far as people's lives, as I observe them in America now, people's lives seem to me to be filled with fear and anger and alienation.
I mean, I don't think that the country is being consumed by it, but those elements loom very large in
And I think it goes beyond America.
I think that fear, anger, alienation are much more a part of all of us than we really want to admit.
But I think until we face it, we really can't act against it.
And I think we're not just talking about America there.
We're talking about humanity in general.
And, uh... Same here.
Uh, I mean, you know, I try and... All right, we're on again.
I don't actually remember where you were, but I think you put a period out of it.
You know, I mean, I don't deny the, you know, the humor and the, you know, the...
joy in life that gets us through the day, that's part of everybody's life, too.
And I try to get that into the book.
I mean, there is a lot of humor in almost everything I've written.
Sometimes... I think more so in this book, maybe, than the other three.
Well, I like... You think... Is that... That may be.
I think it may be.
I think there's some in all of them, but this one... I mean, Hall of Mirrors had a lot of humor.
I was about to say, Hall of Mirrors was...
And this one is, I mean, I think we're allowed to laugh at these people.
You know, they are a kind of gallery of, all of them related to incidents that are true about somebody in Hollywood somewhere.
I can't really do portraits from life, and I don't.
People you knew, by the way?
Or people I knew about.
I mean, these incidents resemble various incidents.
I mean, you know, if you took the last days of John Belushi, I mean, you know, I couldn't, it would be hard to fictionalize that.
I mean, surely you'd have something that would come out far more fractured, or at least as fractured as what happens to these people in the
Is an actual case like that in your mind, I mean, when you're creating, when you're... No, not really.
I mean, it really is very cumulative.
Well, it's just, I mean, there is no resemblance between the Belushi world, particularly, and what happens in this book.
Except the excesses.
The excesses, yes.
I mean, if you go back through the history of motion pictures and the history of the industry generally, you certainly find people as confused and crazy and druggy and so forth as these people.
Now, we spoke about your vision.
How does this work with the creative process?
I mean, how does that translate into the making of a novel?
I mean, do you have this vision, as you say, of America, of alienation or whatever, and then do we work on a novel from there?
Or does the novel develop from the vision?
Maybe I'm not articulating this.
No, I think what I do, what I always compulsively do, is I make up stories, which I've done since I was a child.
And I'm more interested in the characters.
I mean, on the workaday level,
And I'm really more interested in getting the characters to work coherently and convincingly than I am in serving a vision as such.
I mean, the vision takes care of itself, so to speak.
I mean, that's there.
That's the informing.
The vision is part of the way I am.
That's me.
And so it's going to come out that way because it's me writing it.
I don't have to consciously do that.
It does itself, because it's me writing it.
Now, I did not know, in fact, I knew very little of your personal history prior to this novel, even though we had done a previous story.
But so much has been made about your mother's medical history.
I never said, I mean, all of a sudden I decided to say it.
I just never told anybody before.
Why is that, I wonder?
She's the model, obviously, or a model?
No, it's not that she's a model for the character.
It's that the vocabulary and the manner, the language.
I mean, my mother was a kind of schizophrenic who was really absolutely functioning.
Well, sort of functioning.
There are schizoids who function much better than she does.
I once was acquainted with a professional man who I suspect is a schizophrenic, I suspect very strongly because of various things that I recognize.
This man functions as a professional and is quite successful in his career as a professional.
And you can pick it right off.
Yeah, yeah.
I can tell by the... There are certain things that are very, very difficult to describe, and I can't even... I mean, to put it into... To even try to describe an incident where you identify the individual, so I can't really do that.
And it's also very hard to describe how that...
But the association, the thing about the associative process and the way of a certain manner of speech that, boy, just rings a big bell when you want to come across it.
The fellow who reviewed this book for me, I ran it a week ago Sunday, so I'm sure you haven't seen it yet because we'll just send him to tears.
strong parallels between this novel and Under the Volcano.
And I wonder, is this coincidental?
Well, that's been said before of, you know, of other novels of mine.
I think it really is the drug-induced vision, in a way, and maybe the presence of a mountain, you know, kind of a
A mountain which is the border between the two worlds.
And then, of course, Mexico and the movies, too.
So, I mean, there are a number of parallels.
But I don't think the parallels are very important.
I don't see it as really being like... I mean, I like Under the Volcano very much, but I don't think this book would really like it.
Except that there are similarities in the...
central characters, great dependence on things.
This is something that seems to run through all of your books.
Some place we're going to find drugs or alcohol.
Is this a metaphor for anything or is it just a world that you happen to know rather well?
Well, it's all those things.
It's a metaphor for delusion and desire.
And it's also a world that I know something about.
And it's also a way of access, a means of access to different states of consciousness.
It is key to open, that opens a certain area of consciousness.
I think that I have probably done all that I'm going to do.
in that area i mean i've used it you know quite quite enough i think in future i really should but i think i have to get my character to take it i mean they really they really i read somewhere i forget which maybe it was the paris review interview
where you would like to write a play?
Yeah.
Is it something you're working on?
I haven't really started it yet.
I'm debating whether I should, as I probably could, spend next year at the Actors Studio every Monday at the Writers and Directors Workshop.
I see Paul Newman fairly often.
They're neighbors, that's right.
and he suggested the possibility.
So I'm thinking of it, although at the moment what I'm working on is a short story, a long short story.
Where will we see that?
Are you under contract with that?
No, no.
My fiction has most frequently of late been published in Esquire, but I have no commitment to it.
And I ask that question strictly as a collector.
Oh, no.
No, I might show up.
If it doesn't have any four-letter words, I may hit the New Yorker with it.
I mean, for going back a long way, Linda Asher has asked me for stuff that I don't write.
Have you been to the New Yorker?
No, no.
That would be a very interesting exercise, wouldn't it?
For you, I think.
Yes, it would.
I mean, I have a lot of respect for the New Yorker.
But you're not John Cheever.
I'm not John Cheever, and the New Yorker really doesn't take stuff with four letter words.
I mean, this story, which is about protective service work, which my wife did for a while.
A nuts and bolts question.
Of all the pieces I've read in the last couple weeks, I've seen your age variously listed at 48, 47, and 46.
It hasn't been me.
It's 48.
I have 48 in Newsweek, 47 in Time, I think, and 46 in Publishers Week.
Nothing matters.
Maybe I can establish it in 46 and float it around there for a couple of years.
But you're not a boxer, so you don't need those a couple of years.
I guess every one of your novels has had some relationship to an actual experience of yours.
You've been a scriptwriter.
You spent time in New Orleans.
You spent several months in Vietnam.
You went to Central America and looked around.
I mean, are these kind of field trips for you?
I mean, consciously, unconsciously, or is it just a question of using every experience?
I think it's a question of using every experience, and yet I'm not an autobiographical writer.
I use places and situations.
But I don't, you know, I mean, there are some writers who are autobiographical.
That's not my instinct.
I really prefer to make up stories that, you know, that I'm not immediately in.
Like, in the same way that I don't take characters from life, I don't, you know, render myself either.
I mean, although I have things in common with all of my characters.
All of them.
Just about.
Hmm.
And yet they are all individuals with unique voices.
But I mean, I think, you know, I always said about Hall of Mirrors, my first one, that there was plenty of me in Reinhardt, but also in Geraldine, and also in Rainey.
One of my very favorite...
great first novels is all theirs.
I have three favorites.
That's one.
The Movie Goer is another.
That's my other one.
Lie Down in Darkness.
Lie Down in Darkness happens to be spectacular.
Catch-22 I've always, Joe Heller's.
That was a very interesting year, 1961.
Catch-22, The Movie Goer, Rabbit Run.
And as a collector, these are bibliographical things that you come across.
That was the Poor House Fair, wasn't it?
Really?
No, no, no.
Poor House Fair was, Rabbit Run was the first of the rabbit books.
Oh, the rabbit books.
Poor House Fair came earlier.
That was 59, I think.
You tend to remember.
But it was a very fertile year.
Malcolm Cowley has written about, he's very interested in chronology and dates and when to.
for reasons, you know, why all of a sudden is there a flood of creative work?
When was One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest?
That was about 1960.
I want to check it.
He was 60 because sometimes the great notion was 63.
I knew Ken was finishing it.
I just saw him, by the way, in Adelaide.
I've been in, you know, as I say, I've been in Australia.
He and Faye were in Adelaide.
He's not writing anymore.
He has done a bunch of occasional pieces for Rolling Stone and other publications, and he has a book coming out, which is not a novel, but a book of mostly those occasional pieces.
Collective prose.
Some of it is really good.
He has a piece on the death of John Lennon.
It's a very great, very nice piece.
It's called The Demon Box, and it's coming out either this spring or sometime in the summer.
The King Lear, Christopher Leeuwenhoff, I thought, you read all the reviews, I read about a dozen reviews, and you're always looking for something a little different.
And I really liked his, he really picked up on the Lear thing, the mad scene.
Yeah, and that's definitely there.
That was wonderful.
And here I am a Shakespearean.
And that scene didn't connect with me when I read it.
And I said, jerk, of course it should have, it must have, and by design, I'm sure.
Well, it even has a little hut, you know, for him to ask to come in.
And she says, if I'm not mistaken, I think I'll read, you know.
I'll rest, but first I'll pray, which is a line right out of that series.
You know, I went back to it after I read Christopher's review.
Absolutely.
Now, again, you had, this is something I just read.
I had played, I didn't play Lear, I played Kent.
That's a good character.
Yeah.
You're a secondary character.
I had, you know, I had trained as an actor a long time ago.
When I first got out of the service, I went to Teigen Berghaus for a period of some months, and I think I was in the same, I was there about the same time as Jamie Dennis.
I don't usually say that publicly, because it tells her sort of her age.
She looks good.
Yeah, she does.
Do you credit this early training?
I mean, you have wonderful dialogue, crisp, quotable dialogue.
Well, I really studied acting to understand theater.
I was more ambitious as a playwright than I was as an actor.
And I was probably right in that, because I really didn't get very far.
Although I love it, and I do it occasionally.
Now I could, if I had the time, because in middle-aged men, there's always a great call for middle-aged men.
There are lots of young actors, and there are lots of old actors, but middle-aged actors are difficult to find.
But every once in a while I discharge this energy and desire by...
playing something.
And that was something I fell into, almost accidental.
And it was kind of fortunate that I did, I think.
It gave me a running theme for the novel.
I think between this novel and the last one is about four years, right?
Yeah, well, it's necessary.
One of the guilts that pursues me through life is the paucity of output, and I really want to try and make up for that.
I want to keep my standards of quality, but I've always been kind of lazy and not very efficient in the way I worked.
I really want to get what I want to say said in so far as I can.
Is each one better than the last?
Every writer always feels that way.
I hope so.
I think we all should keep learning.
I think I'm still learning how to write novels.
I hope so.
I think you learn a little something every year.
I think the great danger
is self-indulgence.
You start doing things that you can easily master.
You begin to confuse your own private fetishes and hang-ups with what's important from a literary point of view, and pretty soon you're...
Can I get a beer?
What kind of beer is it?
There's a very interesting, let me just check this out.
Not really.
I don't have to change my home basis very much.
I mean, just from Amherst.
I mean, I was in Amherst all the time.
My kids were always, my kids were teenagers.
When they left home, I moved down to Connecticut.
I mean, I do travel a lot.
I think I'll do a little bit less of that.
I'm finally getting it out of my system.
I was in Egypt last spring doing a travel option for Esquire.
We were away six weeks doing that.
And now I'm down in Connecticut.
I don't expect to travel quite as much.
But you moved from Amherst to Connecticut.
That's home now.
Yeah.
Well, everyone keeps asking me about Vietnam as the central metaphor.
It certainly doesn't appear in any form of one of your novels.
Well, I mean, you mentioned it.
I think it's mentioned parenthetically, it's like the sunrise, but it certainly is a central wrestling event there.
But why is everyone coming back to Vietnam when it really only figures
And even then, almost obliquely, in the second novel, why is that?
Are you consumed with the Vietnam experience?
No, I'm not, I'm not consumed with it.
It's very important to me, but I don't think it, you know, I think it was a very important, a central event of, you know, of my generation.
But, uh, I'm not consumed with it.
I mean, I think we have to,
you know put it behind me i will probably you know write about it again when people affected by it it's hard not to run into it and people of a certain age but it's the event of my life along the way that world war ii was with those guys i mean
It's heavily affected what became of my life, where I am.
I was in the Navy for three and a half years on a ship in the late 60s, early 70s, in public affairs.
You were a journalist, I guess, about 2003.
I was having the officer in charge in Vietnam, so we did stuff every day.
You know, it's a thing.
And I can remember nights standing in bridge watches and watching the flares over the DMZ.
I mean, we were never, we slept in clean sheets at night in that space.
Drank scotch.
Illegally.
You know, it does, it does certainly shape your life.
I'll turn this off.
So you know that this is my name.
I'm sorry, are you going to say something?
Oh, well, I was going to say, I only say that a lot of the lifers either left the surface than the height of Vietnam, because it was from so many, and it seemed so out of control, it was so different from the life that they could practice for.
But you know, I look back on it, I never thought I'd admit this.
Fifteen years, sixteen years later.
I enjoyed it.
Look at those pictures of a longer podium in the news with the bar girls attacking us.
Everybody at work.
God, wouldn't you love to be back there?
Oh, there was a wonderful story in the Wall Street Journal a couple months ago about how a longer podium has been cleaned up and how there was one bar and everybody up was on the stage holding hands singing We Are The World.
Can you imagine the sailors doing that?
I've asked you a lot of questions.
The movies, were you really looking to make a comment on the whole lifestyle, cultural type of a thing?
I was looking at the movies as an area of the American experience.
one of the things that struck me about the industry was the gratuitous cruelty and the unnecessary brutality of a vocabulary of brutality that is really rather jarring now I don't know but that same thing doesn't exist in the automobile industry I don't know those
And you really don't come up with the ranks in the movies.
Many of them are just thrown out there.
Oh, absolutely.
I mean, suddenly, you know, turn up at the age of twenty-eight.
winning and losing, and the contemptibility of losing, of not making it, and the, you know, it makes for, I guess it makes for fear, which in turn makes for cruelty and brutality.
And I thought it was all very American and very pertinent to the American experience.
You said earlier, one of the first questions was that you don't see much to be optimistic about, but would you say that you are an optimist or a pessimist?
In the long run, I'm an optimist.
Of course, in the long run, we're all dead.
But, I mean, I really believe that in the idea of the advancement of consciousness
the furthering of it.
I think the more we perceive, the more sharply and acutely we perceive ourselves and come to understand, you know, who we are and what we like, the better off somehow we'll be.
And then that process is going on, I hope.
So in the long run, I'm an optimist.
But in the short run,
with this being the end of an era, the end of a cycle of persecution, wherein European domination and the domination of European defending people is coming to an end.
The old empires, including the American Empire, is really kind of a folding up.
That's the Russian Empire, too.
It's where we have all the symptoms and all the maladies of
an age in recession.
Do you think that you're speaking, you mentioned the 60s as being a time of particular interest to you.
Are you writing about for people of the 60s, or would you say for your generation?
Isn't that a little wider than the 60s?
Oh, I hope it's a little wider than just people from the 60s.
I mean, that conditions as our
you know, as our age.
But you were offered it often, repeatedly, I think, in the 60s.
Yeah, I mean, I think I can still do that, partly because it's not only I who, you know, used the 60s, and I feel that the 60s is significant.
It's not only guys like you and me, you know, who were young in the 60s.
I mean, not only can they not remember Vietnam, but, you know, I mean, I think it's a lot of, you know, it's a lot of, you know, it's artificial nostalgia, because they really weren't, you know, hardly around.
You run into, I mean, since I teach on and off, I really teach three, you know, 20-year-olds who are 20, 21-year-olds.
In spite of the fact, I guess I should say, that they really are fixated on the 60s.
It's funny, my niece was getting married for so much.
She says she's 22.
And I forget the joke, but it was a joke.
It was not a very nice joke.
It was about Ted Kennedy and Jeff Aquittic.
And I think the punchline in Germany was very joke-off.
She's an honor student.
She didn't know who the hell.
I said, of course, she was only four years old.
How could she possibly know?
You seem, to me, quite able to articulate your craft.
I mean, is this something you should think about, what the writer does?
Or do you write?
I mean, is this a trade, or is this an artistic calling?
Obviously, both.
Well, it's not a trade.
But you articulated it very well, I think.
I think that's what I got out of teaching, that I really had to speak about the process of writing and what it was for.
and what it was worth.
And not being inchoate about it, or speaking of it as something ineffable, but really to define what I saw its function to be.
And when you're speaking to college students, you've got to be as specific and as lucid as you can be.
So I think that I really had my back to the wall
You know, and really people were saying to me, you know, all right, what is it about?
What is writing?
What's it for?
What good is it?
Thank you.
So I think that was university teaching that compelled me to define my work and the work of the writer.
Did you try deliberately to be enigmatic about your title?
I've seen three theories operating.
several quotes from the Bible, Matthew Arnold, he's the children of life, and everyone is picking his own hero's success.
One to one Thessalonians, yeah, well, one to one Thessalonians certainly applies, but it's that, I mean, you really do better, I mean, the tenor of that is that people with talent should serve their talent and not face over, keep their heads together.
But it's also that little.
It's also about movies.
I mean, movies that are made out of light and shadow.
And everyone I've discussed the book with.
But there was a brilliant use of The Awakening.
Oh, yeah.
Now, how does that go?
Is this just something that occurred to you that maybe somebody ought to try it?
Yeah, really.
That's the way I came to it.
I was working in the Hermes College Library.
I was working down the end of the room in a borrowed office where American literature and criticism were kept.
And for some reason, The Awakening wasn't among the novels.
It was in that section.
Probably because it was part of a feminist...
Of course.
And I picked it out.
And I took it out as my reading, my recreational reading.
I've never read the novel.
But it wasn't bad.
I mean, it's a kind of a country, provincial Madame Bovary.
One can speak of a provincial Madame Bovary since Madame Bovary itself is provincial.
But an American Madame Bovary.
Kate Chopin was kind of an interesting woman.
She was originally Cato Flaherty from St.
Louis.
Her father was rather famous, and the better is fine.
And after the Civil War, she went south and she married a planter named Chopin.
who died quite young.
Lee Chauvin is Polish.
Is this guy Polish?
No, but Chauvin's name is... Chauvin was half Polish, and his father is French, so that is a French name.
And Chauvin was her married name, and her husband died.
She took over the running of this very big plantation north of New Orleans, and she wrote a series of books
a series of stories which were very successful at first and then she wrote the awakening which so shocked america in 98 99 i think it was around 98 99 for the you know for the liberation and the attitude of a woman i mean she didn't even see this she didn't anticipate this kind of direction and she was roundly just eyes you know and all you know harper's weekly and
All the critics are just shocked.
Liberty now.
Has it been rediscovered today?
Or did you rediscover it?
No, no, it wasn't me.
It was rediscovered, I think, really by feminism.
Because everyone is, every review, you look for the things in common.
Everyone mentions, you know, why would they have to mention the show?
It was a clever thing, I guess.
Would you like dessert?
Not me.
I just might have some coffee.
I'll have a coffee.
It's okay.
I don't know if we can call it the climax, but certainly a sort of resolution for the novel.
Because as far as I can tell, Kate Chopin invented the walk into the drink in American literature, filmic, or otherwise.
I can't think of another book that ends that way.
Does it bother you that some reviewers give that away, or is that almost incidental to the novel?
It bothers me a little.
Because I don't think that that is so...
prefigured?
No.
I really don't.
I mean, it's always a possibility, but I think it surprised me.
It comes out of, because when it happens, it comes out of nowhere.
It seems to be going in a different direction.
Right.
So, yes, it does bother me that people give that away.
I did all things.
I cut it out of our review as a matter of fact.
Good, good.
I said, no, that shouldn't be in there.
I really shouldn't.
I mean, we owe this to the author.
And they said, well, it's there.
I said, no, it's not there.
It surprised me, and I read a lot of books.
And they said,
Yeah, I mean, I tried very hard to make it, you know, to keep the element of surprise, and that was working in the face of, you know, expectation.
It wasn't easy to make it, you know, so, to make it happen suddenly, and then feel the inevitability of it after the fact.
So it does annoy the human reviewers, as, like Noah Adams on all things, the Senator gave it away, like, right away.
Well, I think that's terrible, isn't it?
Yeah.
That's what I want to ask.
Are the long friends an invention?
Long friends are related to a woman I knew in London.
She was otherwise completely lucid.
She was quite lucid and not at all schizoid, except in that she had these hallucinations, which were female figures.
Oh.
tall, silent female figures, who would sometimes, I mean, it was very, very creepy.
Was she frightened by them or was she comfortable with them?
She found them disturbing, she said.
She wasn't frightened of them.
I asked her if she ever tried to talk to them.
And she never did.
I mean, she said, I would know when one would be in the room.
Sometimes I'd go back to the flat, and they're there.
And I've never forgotten.
It's one of those things you never forget.
And so that was really where I got that.
And she really seemed, in other respects, as far as I know, she was totally losing.
Do you see your body of work, which is now five or four, I think it's like four, every one, I mean, highly respected novels, as one piece of work?
Obviously try to do different things with each one.
It's hard to, yeah, I was doing different things.
I never saw it as one piece.
I mean, in a way, it's unifying.
Back to my concerns as they've emerged over four novels.
But I never intended it to be a continuous, a single entity.
Well, I thought that this had your funniest lines.
Maybe you don't remember the funny lines from the previous ones.
Maybe I don't.
I thought there were some very funny lines.
Well, I enjoy myself with the dialogue.
That kind of thing, when you get into it, it kind of builds up a momentum.
And it's fun to write.
And it belongs there.
I mean, I think the book would be really rather bleak.
I mean, really bleak.
And I don't expect people to put my books down and be depressed.
I expect them to feel so good.
Not necessarily uplifted, however.
This is highly uplifted, but, but...
with the kind of feeling of good, you know, a good feeling that you get from something of quality.
And also, you know, a little less lonely, a little more, you know, reflective in a good way.
And I mean, I think the humor really has to be there to make that happen.
You have one phrase, and I can't recall where I read it, but you described Leanne as a closely reasoned madness.
Is that your phrase?
Or is that somebody else's phrase?
I have a quotation.
I honestly can't remember whether that's my phrase.
It sounds like me, but I'm not sure.
It's interesting.
Yeah, but it's apt.
It is apt.
Well, we've covered a lot of ground.
Somebody suggested that the Dongan Lounge character is...
It was suggested by you after the first novel, waiting for the second novel.
I often have a character who's a writer in at my expense, you know.
Yeah.
But I needed to describe him with people's eyes like that.
Yes, I really do.
Well, that's her and Tripp.
He just gets the wrong impression in Kyle.
It's such an odious person.
Well, I'm not a strict realist.
will take liberties with reality, because, you know, I don't believe in a single static reality.
But I've certainly based myself on the real world, and I don't think there's anything in this particular book that is really out of the question, or couldn't have happened.
maybe the scene on the mountain is a little wild yeah the scene on the mountain is a little wild but i'm you know uh that too has its roots in a real thing uh really so uh that's a frightening scene yeah oh yeah that's that's really where i mean he's really about to come under her power there
I remember somebody telling me about their spouse who would grab them by the ear in bed and talk into their ear just sort of endlessly.
Under this power, you know, schizophrenics can be tremendously charismatic.
In a way, he's getting more and more tired, and she's kind of drawing him under.
He's coming under the power of his net.
You have your ocean imagery again there.
The ocean really does figure it out.
It's really true.
It's quite true.
But I was thinking in that scene, I was thinking of the scene where Diana, who is bathing, and Hippolytus,
comes up and sees her naked.
Okay.
But this is the scene in mythology that I was thinking of.
There is a scene, I can't remember the name of the hunter or even, I think it's... Diana was the hunter.
But there's a young man hunting.
He comes on Diana bathing naked.
And she throws water from the lake that she's bathing in.
at him.
His name, I can almost think of it.
And the water strikes him blind.
He's come on something.
It's a famous myth.
It's a very famous myth.
He's blinded.
He sees Diana bathing naked and is blind.
And then torn to pieces by his, or in some versions turned into a stag.
and torn to pieces by a seven-year-old.
And in some, just blondie.
It is a famous film.
And that was on my mind.
It was on my mind.
Where he sees her, what she thinks of as her secret art.
And having seen that, he really can't live.
My review, that was the one scene that describes it the most.
But it's not a shrine, it's just a movie.
It's a movie set.
It's a movie set if you like, if you want it's the movie, it's the shack they built to the whole stop there and on the top of the mountain.
I mean that's what I was thinking of.
So you bring your own baggage to these things.
I mean it isn't really a shrine.
It's not really.
I'm going to shut this up.
I think he's going to play.